17Strategiesfor CopingwithStressin30Minutesor Less

1–5:Fiveminutesor less

6–12:Ten-minutetricks

13–17:Long-term strategies

Takeacloser lookbehind thestress

Weincludeproductswethinkareusefulfor our readers.Ifyoubuy
throughlinksonthis page,wemayearnasmallcommission.Here’sour process.

Howwevetbrandsand products

Stretching,usingessentialoils,scanningyour bodyfor muscular tension,and
foam rolling
arejustafewofthemanywaystorelievestressquickly.Workingwithahealthcare
professionalifthesestrategiesdon’tworkishighlyadvised.

56176769ImageSource/GettyImage

17waystogetyour cortisollevelsdown

Stressisasneakything.Itcancurlup insideyouand
growlikeaChiaPetuntilallthe
sproutshavegrownoutofcontrol.Sometimesstresscanmanifestintophysical
symptoms,liketemporaryhives,one-dayheadaches,or long-term weightgain.

Onesimplewaytodealistoletyour bodyand mind reset.Takeanap —yep,even10
minutesofnappingcanhelp.Ifyouweresleepyinthefirstplace,thelackofsleep
can makeitharder tomanagestress.

Super quickde-stressingtips

Forcealaughor smile—evenanticipatingalaughcanboostyourmood.

Makesureyou’renotslouching,asposturecanaffectmood.

Muteallyourphonenotifications.

Givesomeoneahug.

Playahappysong,or asongthatmakesyouhappy.

Wasthishelpful?

Butwhenthestressboilover happensduringwork,ataparty,or inpublic,dropping
everythingtotakeanap isdefinitelynotagood look.And
inthesesituations,stresscan
alsojointeamswithanxiety,leavingyoufiguringouthowtoreininbothemotions.

Fortunately,therearetipsand tricksthatcanhelp yougetyour
cortisollevelsdown.Ifyou need quicktipstokeep
yourheartbeatingatamoremanageablerate,read our waysto calm
stressinfiveminutesor less.

Ifyou’renoticingabigger pattern,youmightwanttotakealonger breather
withour 30-minutetipsor speaktoa professionaltogettotherootoftheproblem.

Waystocalm stressin5minutesor less

1.Acknowledgeyour stress

Acknowledgingyour stresscanreallyhelp lifttheweightoffyour shouldersand
couldbe thefirststep toaskingfor help.

Facingstressisanopportunitytoresetyourmind and takeitasachancetogrow.
Researcherssaythebrainisrewiringand tryingtolearnfrom
theexperiencesoyoucan handleitdifferentlynexttime.

So,thinkaboutwhether thestressisabuildup or related toamorelong-term
issue.Ifit’s unrelated toanything,maybeit’sasignyour mindandbodyneed
abreak.

Ifit’stied toamorelong-term problem youcan’timmediatelysolve,tryanother
oneofthe quickrelaxer tipsbelow.

2.Chewgum

Chewingisagreatformofstressreduction.Ifyouhavegum
onhand,particularlyscented gum,chewitfor
atleastthreeminutes.Onestudyof101adultsfound thatpeoplewho chewed gum
duringworkhad alower stressresponse.

Butdon’tchewhalf-heartedly! Itmaybeusefultotakeoutyour pent-up
energyonthegum. Another studyfound thatvigorouschewingwasrequired
inorder toachievestressrelief.

3.Drinkstress-reducingtea

Thereareseveralsupplementsthatcanhelpreducestressand
anxiety,butmanyofthese supplementsmaytakeafewweeksor
monthsofintakebeforetheyhaveaneffect.

However,theactofsteppingawayfor afewminutestomaketeacanbetherapeutic.So
whynotalsomakeastress-relievingdrink? Studiesshowthat1gram of applecider
vinegarTrusted Sourcemaytakeover
95minutestoworkitsmagic,whilematchamaytake up toanhour toworkTrusted
Source.

Althoughteatakesatleastanhour
totakeeffect,juststeppingawaycansignaltoyour
bodytorelax.Plus,onceyougetbacktoyourdesk,timemayflyfaster
thanyouknowit.

4.Inhaleessentialoilsor investinadiffuser

Inhalingessentialoilsmayhelp calm themindTrusted
Sourceintimesofstress,anxiety, and insomnia.Thispopular
technique,alsoknownasaromatherapy,focusesonusing
scentstoholisticallybalanceyour
physical,emotional,andpsychologicalhealth.

Popular essentialoilsforcombatingstressinclude:

lavender

rose

vetiver

bergamot

Romanchamomile

frankincense

sandalwood

ylangylang

orangeblossom

Choosescentsbased onyour personalpreferences.For example,ifthesmellof
peppermintremindsyouofholidaysathome,usepeppermint.

Touseessentialoilsfor stress,applythreedropsTrusted Sourceontoacottonpad
and breatheitindeeply10times.Youcanalsopurchaseadiffuser foryour room or
deskso thatitconstantlyreleasesacalmingscent.

5.Stretchatyour desk

It’sincrediblyimportanttotakebreaksduringwork,evenwhenyoufeellikethere’sarush
togetyourtaskathand done.For thetimeswhenyoucan’tleaveyour
desk,youcanstill stretchwhilesittingfor fiveminuteswithoutintervention.

Stretchingcanalsohelpwithdiscomfortandwork-related painor
injuriesTrusted Source. Thesimpleststretchyoucandoistheupper bodyandarm
stretch.Todothis:

Clasp your handstogether and pushupwardwithyour palmsfacingthesky.

Stretchand hold theposefor 10seconds.

Trytwistingyour torsoleftandrightfor 30seconds,thenrepeat.

For afull-bodystretch,checkoutour desk-stretchroutine.

Bonustipsfor stress

Keep astressballatyour desk.Sometimesallyouneed
todoisphysicallyexertallthe pent-up energy.

Haveatactileitem for comfort.Thiscanbeacrystalor apieceofvelvet.

Buyamassagepadfor your
chair.This\$45purchaseisthemostaffordable,worth-it purchasefor
momentaryrelaxation.Sometimesstresscanbearesultofbackstrainor
pain.Oryour tensed musclesmightbeincreasingyour stress.Abackmassager
with heated functionalitywillhelp yourelaxevenmore.

Wasthishelpful?

Waystocalm stressin10minutes

6.Gofor awalk

Exerciseor
walkingisagreatwaytomanagestress.First,itletsyouescapethesituation.
Second,exercisehelpsyour body
releaseendorphins,theneurotransmittersthatmake youfeelwarm andfuzzy.

Thinkofwalkingasmovingmeditation.Afewlapsaround theblockcanhelp
youforget previoustensionand relaxsoyoureturntothesituationcalmer and
morecollected.

7.Memorizethisyogaroutine

Yogaisn’tonlyapopularexercisefor allages,butit’salsogainingtractionfor
decreasing stress,anxiety,and depression.AccordingtoresearchTrusted
Source,yogainterrupts stressbyproducinganeffectthat’soppositetoyour
flight-or-fightresponse.

Asimpleroutinecanhelp lower yourcortisollevels,blood pressure,and
heartrate.Oneof our
favorite10-minuteroutinesisbyTaraStiles.Thisroutinestartsoffwithalotofrelaxing
swaying.

8.Intervenewithmindfulness-based,stress-reductiontechniques

Sometimesstresscancauseyourmind tospiraland lead
youdownanunnecessaryrabbit
holeofnegativethoughts.Onewayofescapingthatspiralistoanchoryourselftothe
presentand focusonimmediateresultsyoucanachieve.

Methodstotry

Closeyoureyesandscanyourbody.Payattentiontothephysicalfeelings.

Sitand meditatebypayingattentiontoyour breathing,sounds,sensations,and
emotions. Letthempassthroughyou.

Changeupyour movementbytakingawalkor standingup.

Givefullattentiontosmalldailyactivities,likedrinkingwater,eating,orbrushingyour
teeth.

Wasthishelpful?

Onlinemeditationoptions

Read our reviewofthebestonlinemeditationoptionstofind therightfitfor
you.

Wasthishelpful?

9.Writeitout

Writingoutwhatyou’restressed aboutcanhelp youfocusyour
thoughtsonthepositiveor waystotacklethenegative.

Writeawaythestress

Trythe“sowhat?”exercisebyaskingyourselfthatquestionuntilitrevealssomething
aboutyourself.

Seeifthereareanyexceptionstoyour concerns.

Keep ajournaltotrackyour changesand learnings.

Wasthishelpful?

Treatthismethod
ofwritingitoutasawayoftakingnoteswithoutderailingyourwhole workday.Keep
thesenotesonhand tocheckfor patternstoseeifthere’sadeeper reason
behindyour stress.

10.Try4-7-8breathing

The4-7-8breathingmethod isapowerfultrickthatgivesyour bodyanextraboostof
oxygen.Deep breathingisaneffectivewaytoreduceanxiety,stress,and
depression.

Todothis:Placethetip ofyour tongueagainsttheroofofyourmouthand keep
ittherethe wholetime.

Onecycleof4-7-8breathing

Partyourlipsslightlyandexhalewithawhooshingsound throughyourmouth.

Closeyourlipsand inhalesilentlythroughyournose.Countto4inyourhead.

Hold yourbreathfor 7seconds.

Exhale(withawhooshsound) for 8seconds.

Practicethismindlesslytoletyour brainrelax.

Completethiscyclefor fourfullbreaths.

Wasthishelpful?

11.Trytheemotionalfreedom technique(EFT)

Tappingor
psychologicalacupressureisaspecificmethodicsequencethatinvolves
tappingspecificmeridianpoints(areasofthebodyenergyflowsthrough,accordingto
TraditionalChineseMedicine) and recitingsetupphrasesthatwillhelp
youacknowledge issuesand acceptyourself.

EFT in5steps

Identifywhat’scausingyoustress.

Onascaleof0to10,writedownhowintensetheissueis(10beingthehighest).

Createasetup phrasethataddressesyour problem.For example:“EventhoughI’m
stressed aboutthisdeadline,Ideeplyandcompletelyacceptmyself.”

Tap ontheninemeridianpoints(eyebrow,sideofeyes,under eyes,under
nose,chin,start ofcollarbone,and under arm)
seventimes.Repeatthephrasewitheachtappingpoint.Do
thissequencetwotothreetimes.

Rateyour finalintensitytoseeifyour
stresslevelhasgonedownto0.Ifnot,repeat.

Wasthishelpful?

12.Talkinthird person

Whether it’stoyourselfor withafriend,talkingcanhelp tamper downyour
stresslevel. Yep,talkingtoyourselfor aboutyourselfinthird personisaform
ofexertingself-control over negativeemotions.

Accordingtoresearchers,“Referringtoyourselfinthethirdpersonleadspeopletothink
aboutthemselvesmoresimilar tohowtheythinkaboutothers.”

Doingthiscanhelp youdistanceyourselffrom theexperienceor
situation.Thebestpart, though? Itrequireslesseffort.

Waystocalm stressin30minutes

13.Exercise,butmakeitdaily

Wementioned
walkingearlier,butthatwasjustaquickbreak.Routineexercisecanhelp
improvethewayyour bodyusesoxygenand
helpsyoucopewithstressfulsituations.The benefitsofworkingoutbuild up
over time.Youmaybeabletofeelthedifferenceasyou sticktoyour routine.

It’srecommended toexercisefor atleast30minutesfivedaysaweek.

14.Takeahotbath

Theanswer towashingawayadayofstressmaybeinyourbathroom.Hotwater isknown
tohelp releaseendorphinsand increaseblood
flowtotheskin.Warmbathscanalso:

improvebreathing

reduceriskofheartattack

lower blood pressure

burncalories

For folkslivingwithchronicpain,hotbathscanalsohelpkeep muscleslooseand
reduce flare-ups.

15.Cleanyour room,desk,ordishes

Besidesremovingclutter and givingyourelieffrom acrowded
space,cleaningisan effectivemindfulnesspractice.Onestudyfound
thatstudentswhowashed disheshad greater statesofmindfulnessand
positivemoods.

Ifyoudon’thavetimetocleanthoroughly,takethisopportunitytoorganizeitemsor
tackle onecleaningtaskatatime.Forexample,ifyouhaveaload
oflaundry,useeachwashing and dryingloadtotimeyour breaks.

16.Talkitoutorreachouttofriends

Socialsupportisanextremelyeffectivewaytorelievestress.Askafriend
orco-worker to beasoundingboard asyoutalkoutyour issues.

Sometimesthecasewithstressfulsituationsisthatyou’retryingtofind aproblem
or a
connectionwhenthereisn’tone.Anoutsider’sperspectivemayhelpyouseethatmore
clearly.

Ifyoudoreachouttoafriend,besuretoexpressyour thanksand returnthefavor
when theyask!

17.Foam rolloutthetension

Sometimesstressbecomesphysical:Itcancauseyour musclestoknotup.Theseknots
candevelop inveryspecificplacesthatbuild up over
time,whichyoucan’teasilyunwind viaexerciseor
self-massage.That’swherefoam rollingstepsin.

Foam rollingaddspressuretothosetrigger points,signalingyour
bodytoincreaseblood flowtothatareaand for your
muscletorelax.Afull-bodyroutinecanhelp promote
relaxationthewaygettingamassagewill.Tryeightmoveshere.

Takeacloser lookatyour stress

Invisiblestressisreal,and itcanbuild
upintochronicstress.Sometimeswedon’tnoticeit
becauseit’sbeentherethewholetime,likeafreckleor
mole.However,changingfreckles or
molesaresomethingyouwanttotakethetimetocheckout,right? Stressisthesame.

Ifyounoticeachangeinyour patienceor find yourselfmoreeasilytriggered
byslight noisesor simplemistakes,consider whether youneed
totakeabreakand calm yourmind, or ifthere’ssomethingbigger
atplay.Chronicstresscanincreaseyour risk forother
mentalhealthconcerns,suchasdepressionandanxiety.

Ifthesestrategiesaren’tgivingyoutoolstocope,tryseekinghelp from
aprofessional.

MindfulMoves:Yogafor Anxiety

ChristalYuenisan editor atHealthlinewhowritesand
editscontentrevolvingaround sex, beauty,health,and
wellness.She’sconstantlylookingfor waystohelp readersforgetheir
ownhealthjourney.Youcanfindher onTwitter.

Lastmedicallyreviewed onNovember 29,2018

Howwereviewed thisarticle:

Sources

History

Our expertscontinuallymonitor thehealthand wellnessspace,and weupdateour
articles whennewinformationbecomesavailable.

CurrentVersion

Mar 27,2020

WrittenBy

ChristalYuen

Edited By

ElizabethDonovan

Nov29,2018

MedicallyReviewed By

TimothyJ.Legg,PhD,PsyD

Sharethisarticle

Medicallyreviewed byTimothyJ.Legg,PhD,PsyD—WrittenbyChristalYuen
—Updated onMarch27,2020

Wasthisarticlehelpful?

Yes

No

10EasyWaystoManageand RelieveStress

Tipstomanagestressfulsituations

Listentomusic

Callafriend

Self-talk

Diet

Laugh

Tea

Mindfulness

Exercise

Sleep

Breathebetter

Takeaway

IvanGener/StocksyUnited

Tipstomanagestressful situations

Itmightsurpriseyoutolearnthatbiologicalstressisafairlyrecentdiscovery.Itwasn’tuntil
thelate1950sthatendocrinologistHansSelyefirstidentified and documented
stress.

Symptomsofstressexisted longbeforeSelye,buthisdiscoveriesled
tonewresearchthat hashelped millionscopewithstress.We’vecompiled
alistofthetop 10waystorelieve stress.

Listentomusic

Ifyou’refeelingoverwhelmedbyastressfulsituation,trytakingabreakand
listeningto relaxingmusic.Playingcalm
musichasapositiveeffectonthebrainand body,canlower blood pressure,and
reducecortisol,ahormonelinked tostress.

Werecommend cellomaster Yo-YoMaplayingBach,butifclassicalreallyisn’tyour
thing, trylisteningtooceanor naturesounds.Itmaysound
cheesy,buttheyhavesimilar relaxing effectstomusic.

Talkitoutwithafriend

Whenyou’refeelingstressed,takeabreaktocallafriend andtalkaboutyour
problems. Good relationshipswithfriendsand loved
onesareimportanttoanyhealthylifestyle.

They’reespeciallyimportantwhenyou’reunder
alotofstress.Areassuringvoice,evenfor
aminute,canputeverythinginperspective.

Talkyourselfthroughit

Sometimescallingafriendisnotanoption.Ifthisisthecase,talkingcalmlytoyourselfcan
bethenextbestthing.

Don’tworryaboutseemingcrazy —justtellyourselfwhyyou’restressed
out,whatyou havetodotocompletethetaskathand,and
mostimportantly,thateverythingwillbe okay.

Eatright

Stresslevelsandaproper
dietarecloselyrelated.Whenwe’reoverwhelmed,weoften forgettoeatwelland
resorttousingsugary,fattysnackfoodsasapick-me-up.

Trytoavoid sugarysnacksand planahead.Fruitsand
vegetablesarealwaysgood,and fish
withhighlevelsofomega-3fattyacidshavebeenshowntoreducethesymptomsofstress.
Atunasandwichreallyisbrainfood.

Laughitoff

Laughter
releasesendorphinsthatimprovemoodanddecreaselevelsofthestress-causinghormonescortisolandadrenaline.Laughingtricksyournervoussystem
into makingyouhappy.

Our
suggestion:watchsomeclassicMontyPythonskitslike“TheMinistryofSillyWalks.”
ThoseBritsaresohilarious,you’llsoonbecrackingup,rather thancrackingup.

Drinktea

Alargedoseofcaffeinecausesashort-term spikeinblood
pressure.Itmayalsocause your
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenalaxistogointooverdrive.

Instead ofcoffeeor
energydrinks,trygreentea.Ithaslessthanhalfthecaffeineofcoffee and
containshealthyantioxidants,aswellastheanine,anaminoacid thathasacalming
effectonthenervoussystem.

Bemindful

Mostofthetipswe’vesuggested
provideimmediaterelief,buttherearealsomanylifestyle
changesthatcanbemoreeffectiveinthelongrun.Theconceptof“mindfulness”isalarge
partofmeditativeandsomaticapproachestomentalhealthand hasbecomepopular
recently.

From yogaand
taichitomeditationandPilates,thesesystemsofmindfulnessincorporate
physicalandmentalexercisesthatpreventstressfrombecomingaproblem.Tryjoininga
class.

Onlinemeditationoptions

Read our reviewofthebestonlinemeditationoptionstofind therightfitfor
you.

Wasthishelpful?

Exercise(evenfor aminute)

Exercisedoesn’tnecessarilymeanpower liftingatthegym or trainingfor
amarathon.A shortwalkaroundtheofficeor simplystandingup
tostretchduringabreakatworkcan offer
immediatereliefinastressfulsituation.

Gettingyour blood movingreleasesendorphinsand canimproveyourmood almost
instantaneously.

Sleep better

Everyoneknowsstresscancauseyoutolosesleep.Unfortunately,lackofsleep
isalsoa keycauseofstress.Thisviciouscyclecausesthebrainand
bodytogetoutofwhackand onlygetsworsewithtime.

Makesuretogetthedoctor-recommended seventoeighthoursofsleep.TurntheTVoff
earlier,dim
thelights,andgiveyourselftimetorelaxbeforegoingtobed.Itmaybethe
mosteffectivestressbuster onourlist.

Breatheeasy

Theadvice“takeadeep breath”mayseem
likeacliché,butitholdstruewhenitcomesto stress.For
centuries,Buddhistmonkshavebeenconsciousofdeliberatebreathingduring
meditation.

For aneasythree-tofive-minuteexercise,situp inyour chairwithyour
feetflatonthefloor and handsontopofyour knees.Breatheinand outslowlyand
deeply,concentratingon your lungsastheyexpandfullyinyourchest.

Whileshallowbreathingcausesstress,deep breathingoxygenatesyour
blood,helps center yourbody,andclearsyour mind.

Learnmoreaboutstressrelief

Stressisanunavoidablepartoflife,butthatdoesn’tmeanyoushould
ignoreit.Toomuch untreated stresscancausepotentiallyseriousphysicaland
mentalhealthproblems.

Thegoodnewsisthatinmanycases,stressismanageable.Withsomepatienceand afew
usefulstrategies,youcanreduceyour stress,whether it’sfamilystressor
stressatthe workplace.

Lastmedicallyreviewed onJuly1,2016

Howwereviewed thisarticle:

Sources

History

Our expertscontinuallymonitor thehealthand wellnessspace,and weupdateour
articles whennewinformationbecomesavailable.

CurrentVersion

Jul3,2019

WrittenBy

Nathan Reese

Edited By

FrankCrooks

Jul1,2016

MedicallyReviewed By

TimothyJ.Legg,PhD,PsyD

Sharethisarticle

Medicallyreviewed byTimothyJ.Legg,PhD,PsyD—WrittenbyNathanReese—Updated
onJuly3,2019

Wasthisarticlehelpful?

Yes

No

PsychologicalStress

Overview

Good andbad

Healthimpacts

Signs

Self-care

Findingatherapist

Overview

Stress.It’sasix-letter wordthatmanyofusdread.Whether
it’satenseinteractionwitha bossor pressurefrom friendsand
family,weallfacestressfulsituationsfromtimetotime.

For someofus,theseeventshappensporadically.For
others,dailystressisaregular part oflife.

Psychologicalstressdefinition

There’sagood
chancewecanallidentifynegativestress,butdidyouknowthatstresscan
alsobepositive?

Good stress,called
eustress,canactuallybebeneficialtoyou.Unlikebadstress,or distress,good
stresscanhelp withmotivation,focus,energy,and performance.For some
people,itcanalsofeelexciting.

Ontheother hand,bad stresstypicallycausesanxiety,concern,and adecreasein
performance.Italsofeelsuncomfortable,and itcanlead
tomoreseriousissuesifnot addressed.

Psychologicalstresseffects

It’snosecretthatthelong-term effectsofdistresscandamageour healthTrusted
Source.

Stresshastheabilitytonegativelyimpactour
lives.Itcancausephysicalconditions,such asheadaches,digestiveissues,and
sleep disturbances.Itcanalsocausepsychological and
emotionalstrains,includingconfusion,anxiety,anddepression.

AccordingtotheAmericanPsychologicalAssociation,untreatedchronicstress,or
stress that’sconstantand lastsover anextended
periodoftime,canresultinhighbloodpressure or aweakened immunesystem.

ItcanalsocontributetothedevelopmentofobesityTrusted Sourceand heart
diseaseTrusted Source.

Psychologicalstresssigns

There’sadistinctionbetweenastressor andactualstress.Astressor
canbeaperson, place,or
situationthat’scausingyoustress.Stressistheactualresponsetooneor a
combinationofthosestressors.

Thereareanynumber ofsituationsthatcancausestress.Dr.GaryBrown,alicensed
psychotherapist,sayssomeofthemorecommonstressorsinclude:

relationship conflictsathome

neworincreasingworkresponsibilities

increasingdemands

financialstrain

lossofaloved one

healthproblems

movingtoanewlocation

exposuretooneor moretraumaticincidents,suchasacar accidentor
aviolentcrime

Knowinghowtospotthesignsofstressisthefirststep
indevelopingwaystomanageits adverseeffects.

Someofthemorecommonphysical,psychological,and
emotionalsignsofchronicstress include:

rapid heartrate

elevated blood pressure

feelingoverwhelmed

fatigue

difficultysleeping

poor problem-solving

fear thatthestressor won’tgoaway

persistentthoughtsaboutoneor morestressors

changesinbehavior,includingsocialwithdrawal,feelingsofsadness,frustration,lossof
emotionalcontrol,inabilitytorest,andself-medication

Waystomanagestress

Whenitcomestomanagingstress,makingsimplechangescangoalongwayinimproving
your overallhealthand reducingstress.Havingtoolsand
strategiesyoucanturntoin stressfulsituationscanpreventyour
stresslevelsfromescalating.

Find abalance

It’simportanttostructuresomeofyour
timesothatyoucanbecomfortablybusywithout
beingoverwhelmed,Brownsays.“Workinghard doesnotusuallyequatewith working
efficiently,”hesaid.Infact,workingtoomuchcanreduceproductivity.

Bekind toyourself

Understandingthatyouaren’tweakbecauseyou’refeelingstressisimportant,Brown
says.Stressisaverynormalreactiontothestressorsinyourlife.

Leanonthepeopleyoutrust

Beforeyour
stresslevelsescalate,reachouttosomeoneyoutrust,suchasafriend,family
member,or coworker.Sharingyour feelingsor ventingyour concernsmayhelp
toreduce your stress.

Keep ajournal

Setasidetimetoreflectonyour day.Writedownanythoughtsor
feelingsyou’rehaving. Thiscanbeausefultooltohelpyoubetter understandyour
stressorsandhowyoureactto stress,Brownsays.

Eatwell-balanced,regular meals

Whenitcomestomanagingstress,proper nutritionisyour
friend.Skippingmealscan lower yourblood
sugar,whichcandepressyourmood.Insomecases,thiscanalsotrigger
intensefeelingsofanger and frustration,Brownsays.

Exerciseregularly

Engaginginregular physicalactivitycanimproveyour overallhealthand
reduceyour stress levels.Whenyouexercise,your
bodyreleasesendorphins.Thesefeel-goodhormonescan
alsoeasesymptomsofdepressionand anxiety.

Getplentyofrest

Your abilitytomanagestressdecreaseswhenyou’retired.Trytogetarecommended
seventoninehourseachnight.Ifyouhaveinsomnia,aim togetasmuchsleep
asyoucan, thenbuild inperiodsofrestduringtheday.

Practicerelaxationexercises

Theseexercises,whichcanincludedeep,slowbreathingandprogressivemuscle
relaxation,involvetensingand thenrelaxingvariousgroupsofmuscles.

Trytocarveoutthreeminutes,threetimesadaytopracticetheseexercises,saysDr.
RussellMorfitt,apsychologist.

Scheduleyour worry

Whileitmayfeelawkwardatfirst,consider
schedulingtheworrytospecificpartsofthe
day,Morfittsays.“Whenweleanintoourfearsbydeliberatelyseekingoutour
stressors and notavoidingthem or
escapingthem,theyoftenlosetheirpower,”hesaid.

Workingwithaprofessional

Atherapistor mentalhealthprofessionalcanalsohelp youfind
waystomanageyour stress.

Consider workingwithamentalhealthprofessionalifyour stressischronicor
accompanied bydailyheadaches,tightjaw, fibromyalgia,or
constantfatigue,saysDr. DavidJ.Puder
ofLomaLindaUniversityBehavioralMedicineCenter.

Youshould alsoseeamentalhealthprofessionalifyouhavefeelingsofdepression,
suicidalthoughts,and panicattacks.

Whenlookingfor amentalhealthprofessional,askfriendsor familymembersfor
referrals. After your firstsession,Puder
saystoreflectonthefollowingquestions:

Willyoutrustthetherapist?

Doyoufeelheard and understood?

Doyoufeelcomfortabletospeakup ifyoudisagreewiththem?

Canyouseethattheycareaboutyouasanindividual?

Answeringthesequestionscanhelp youdetermineifthispersonisrightfor you.

Effectivetherapysessionscanhappeninperson,over thephone,and
evenonline.Tohelp find
atherapistthat’srightforyou,checkoutthesefiveaffordabletherapyoptions.

Lastmedicallyreviewed onFebruary1,2019

Howwereviewed thisarticle:

Sources

History

Our expertscontinuallymonitor thehealthand wellnessspace,and weupdateour
articles whennewinformationbecomesavailable.

CurrentVersion

Feb 1,2019

WrittenBy

SaraLindberg

Edited By

Nizam Khan(TechSpace)

MedicallyReviewed By

TimothyJ.Legg,PhD,PsyD

Sharethisarticle

Medicallyreviewed
byTimothyJ.Legg,PhD,PsyD—WrittenbySaraLindbergonFebruary 1,2019

Wasthisarticlehelpful?

Yes

No

CanAntihistaminesTreatStress-Induced Rashes?

Dotheywork?

Bestoptions

Sideeffects

Precautions

Takeaway

Stresstriggershistaminerelease,whichcancauseitching,redness,and
hivesinsome people.Canover-the-counter (OTC)
antihistaminesproviderelief?

Histamineisakeychemicalinvolved ininflammation,allergicreactions,and
regulatingthe body’sstressresponse.

Whenstressoccurs,thebodyreleaseshistamine,whichcanmanifestinmentalhealth
symptomssuchasanxietyor inphysicalreactionssuchasheartpalpitationsorskin
issues.Someindividualsaremoresensitivetohistamine’seffectson
theskin,whichcan lead toitching,redness,and hives.

Becausethesesymptomsarelinked tohistaminerelease,canantihistamineslike
Benadrylrelievethem? Let’stakealookatwhattheresearchsays.

Canantihistamineshelpwithstressrashes?

Antihistaminescansometimeshelpwithstress-induced rashes,buttheir
successvaries from persontoperson.

SomeresearchTrusted
Sourcesuggeststhatantihistaminescanalleviateitchingand rash
symptomsexacerbated bystressbyblockinghistaminereceptorsinyour body.

AcasereportTrusted Sourceinvolvinga42-year-old
womanwithseverestress-related itchingand rashindicated
thatantihistaminetreatmentdidn’tprovideanyrelief.Rather, whenshestarted
takinganxiolytictherapy(likebenzodiazepines) asananxiety treatment, her
itchingwentawaywithinaday.

Thissuggeststhatfor somepeople,medicationsaimed
atreducinganxietymaybemore effectivefor stress-related
rashesbydirectlyaddressingtheunderlyingstress.

Howdoantihistaminestreatstressrashes?

Antihistamines,suchasBenadryl,Claritin,or
Zyrtec,blockhistaminereceptors, preventinghistaminefrom
bindingandtriggeringtheinflammatoryresponse.Byreducing
histamineactivity,antihistaminescanalleviateitching,redness,skindiscoloration,
and swellingassociated withstress-related rashes,providingrelieffrom
thesesymptoms.

Whatishappeningwhenastressrashdoesn’trespond toantihistamines?

Antihistaminesmaynotalwaysworkeffectivelyfor stress-related
rashesbecauseofafew reasons:

Nonhistaminemechanisms:Althoughhistamineplaysasignificantrole,stresscantrigger
other pathwaysTrusted
Sourcethatcontributetoskinreactions,suchascytokinesand
neuropeptides.Antihistaminesspecificallytargethistaminereceptors,sotheymaynot
addresstheseother mechanisms.

Individualvariability:Peoplevaryinhowtheirbodiesrespond tostressand
howsensitive theyaretohistamine.Someindividualsmayhaveastronger
immuneresponseor other factorscontributingtotheir
skinreactionsthatantihistaminesalonemaynot fully alleviate.

Whichantihistamineisbestforstressrashes?

Thereisn’taspecificantihistaminethat’suniversallyconsidered thebestfor
treating stress-related
rashesbecauseindividualresponsescanvary.Butsomecommonlyused
antihistaminesfor itchingandrashsymptoms,includingthoseexacerbated
bystress, include:

Cetirizine:Cetirizine(Zyrtec)
isknownforitseffectivenessinreducingitchingand hives caused
byallergicreactions.

Loratadine:Loratadine(Claritin) isanother popular
choicethat’snonsedatingand generallywelltolerated.

Diphenhydramine:Diphenhydramine(Benadryl) providesquickreliefbutcancause
drowsiness,makingitmoresuitablefornighttimeuse.Benadrylcream
isalsoavailablefor topicalreliefofitchingand irritation.

Fexofenadine:Fexofenadine(Allegra)isnonsedatingand effectivefor
relievingitchingand allergicreactions.

For severereactions,doctorsmayprescribestronger
antihistamineslikehydroxyzine (Atarax,Vistaril),whichisused
foritssedativeand anti-anxietypropertiesinadditiontoits
antihistamineeffects.

Sideeffectsofantihistamines

Herearecommonsideeffectsrelated toantihistamines:

drowsiness(especiallywitholder antihistamineslikediphenhydramine)

drymouth

blurred vision

constipation

difficultyurinating

dizziness

headache

nausea

nervousnessor agitation(lesscommonwithnonsedatingantihistamines)

confusion(especiallyinolder individuals)

Whoshould notuseantihistaminesfor stressrashtreatment?

Antihistaminesfor stressrashtreatmentmaynotbesuitablefor
everyone,particularly:

Children:Someantihistaminesmaynotberecommended for childrenunder
acertainage withoutmedicalsupervision.Talkwithapediatricianfor
theirrecommendations.

Older individuals:Theymaybemorepronetosideeffectssuchasconfusionor
dizziness.

Peoplewithcertainmedicalconditions:Theseconditionsincludeglaucoma,prostate
enlargement,urinaryretention,severeliver disease,and
certainheartconditions.

Thosewhoarepregnantor
nursing:Antihistaminescanpotentiallyaffectthedeveloping
fetusorpassintobreastmilk,sotheir useshould bediscussed withahealthcare
professional.

Other treatmentsfor stressrashes

topicalcreams(hydrocortisone,calaminelotion)

moisturizers

corticosteroids

coolcompress

benzodiazepines

cognitivebehavioraltherapy(CBT)

stressmanagementtechniques

Wasthishelpful?

Takeaway

Stresscanoccasionallycauseredness,skindiscoloration,itching,andhivesdueto
histaminerelease.AntihistamineslikeBenadrylor Zyrtecmayhelp
alleviatesymptomsby blockinghistamine’seffects.

Ifyouhaveastressrash,consider anover-the-counter (OTC) antihistamineand
try
reducingstresswithrelaxationtechniques.Consultahealthcareprofessionaliftherashis
severeor ifOTCremediesdon’tproviderelief.
